
Introduction: Basic Terminology, Elementary Data Organization, Built in Data Types in C. 
Algorithm, Efficiency of an Algorithm, Time and Space Complexity, Asymptotic notations: 
Big Oh, Big Theta and Big Omega, Time-Space trade-off. Abstract Data Types (ADT)  

Arrays: Definition, Single and Multidimensional Arrays, Representation of Arrays: Row 
Major Order, and Column Major Order, Derivation of Index Formulae for 1-D,2-D,3-D and 
n-D Array Application of arrays, Sparse Matrices and their representations.   

Linked lists: Array Implementation and Pointer Implementation of Singly Linked Lists, 
Doubly Linked List, Circularly Linked List, Operations on a Linked List. Insertion, Deletion, 
Traversal, Polynomial Representation and Addition Subtraction & Multiplications of Single 
variable & Two variables Polynomial.   

08 
II 
 
 
Stacks: Abstract Data Type, Primitive Stack operations: Push & Pop, Array and Linked 
Implementation of Stack in C, Application of stack: Prefix and Postfix Expressions, 
Evaluation of postfix expression, Iteration and Recursion- Principles of recursion, Tail 
recursion, Removal of recursion Problem solving using iteration and recursion with 
examples such as binary search, Fibonacci numbers, and Hanoi towers. Tradeoffs 
between iteration and recursion. 

Queues: Operations on Queue: Create, Add, Delete, Full and Empty, Circular queues, 
Array and linked implementation of queues in C, Dequeue and Priority Queue. 
08 

III 
Searching: Concept of Searching, Sequential search, Index Sequential Search, Binary 
Search. Concept of Hashing & Collision resolution Techniques used in Hashing. Sorting: 
Insertion Sort, Selection, Bubble Sort, Quick Sort, Merge Sort, Heap Sort and Radix Sort. 
08 
IV 
 
Trees: Basic terminology used with Tree, Binary Trees, Binary Tree Representation: Array 
Representation and Pointer(Linked List) Representation, Binary Search Tree, Strictly 
Binary Tree ,Complete Binary Tree . A Extended Binary Trees, Tree Traversal algorithms: 
Inorder, Preorder and Postorder, Constructing Binary Tree from given Tree Traversal, 
Operation of Insertation , Deletion, Searching & Modification of data  in Binary Search . 
Threaded Binary trees, Traversing Threaded Binary trees.  Huffman coding using Binary 
Tree. Concept & Basic Operations for  AVL Tree , B Tree & Binary Heaps 
08 
V 
Graphs: Terminology used with Graph, Data Structure for Graph Representations: 
Adjacency Matrices, Adjacency List, Adjacency. Graph Traversal: Depth First Search and 
Breadth First Search, Connected Component, Spanning Trees, Minimum Cost Spanning 
Trees: Prims and Kruskal algorithm. Transitive Closure and Shortest Path algorithm: 
Warshal Algorithm and Dijikstra Algorithm. 